Outstanding everywhere I went.
I mean, when I was introduced, we'd have these meetings in the town.
When I was introduced in some little town out near El Paso someplace, there'd all be an Aggie there, and I'd hear the hoot, you know?
And I always knew if Perot kicked me off the committee, I'd have a place to stay.
And the other thing that I found, Haskell, was as I talked with these people,
They all had favorite teachers, and all these teachers had nicknames.
And one of the things I did, I collected these nicknames.
I'll show you this list.
I have a list of 86 of these.
We want to preserve that.
You want to preserve that.
But think what it would be.
Don't worry about it now.
I got it right here.
Think what it would be if we had all the anecdotes to explain how those nicknames came about.
Well, I'll tell you, every former student could tell me... You recognize a lot of these, eh?
Oh, yes.
Hey.
Square Root, Jackson, and Alphabet Thompson, and...
Whiskey Joe Gannon.
I need a copy of those.
Yeah.
But the thing about it was, see, as a dean, I would be invited to go to these Aggie clubs and stuff, and I'd share with them these names, and immediately somebody in the group would get out.
One night I was down in Beaumont,
And these two old guys were really almost got in a fist fight over this, this guy, Count Zirko, who was, who would come into class.
They were arguing whether one said he was Bulgarian, the other said he was Russian.
And he would walk into class and take his cape off.
and put it on the chair, right?
And these guys would describe this.
And they all had their favorite.
There was a guy in English named Ingroff who, the second day of class, knew everybody's name.
First and second name.
200 students in the class.
You knew that.
Some guy named Stuart, Judge Stuart.
And they all had, they can all tell you Judge Stuart's favorite story, see?
And this was what the former students gave the institution its reputation in these towns, because they loved the place.
So going into these towns, if you're from A&M,
And they knew right off I wasn't Texan from my accent and everything.
But I was from A&M.
I wasn't an Aggie.
They'd say to you, are you an Aggie?
I'd say, no.
Oh, it's too bad.
That's too bad.
But wonderful people.
And they were all over the states.
This helped me a lot, see.
So you had locally, if you wanted to do something with that school or something, you had Aggies there.
And this wasn't just in this country.
I remember going to Guatemala City, meeting with 250 Aggies on Mustard Day, while we had machine guns and soldiers outside the hotel.
And we have this muster and 200 and some Aggies show up singing the fight song.
We were the only three people registered in the hotel there from A&M, all the other people.
But the locals, Aggies, came out.
So this is what the institution has that is so important.
Here in Texas, as you made your rounds around the state, what were the other major players
in education?
What other schools were our cohorts in the major league?
Well, the five others I mentioned, U of H, UT, Texas Tech, Baylor, and Trinity, we did a lot of work with, yeah.
Trinity has a leader down there named John Moore, who's dean of their college, a very, very outstanding leader.
And when we'd get in these battles with the state in terms of moving ahead, reforming things,
We always had good support from these other institutions.
And then, of course, we had good connections with Sam Houston and places like this, too.
We developed collaborative programs
With Lamar, we had a joint program in prepare educational administrators.
Since they didn't offer doctorates, we felt it was an obligation of the land-grant university to work with them, so we developed a collaborative program.
We offered some courses down there.
We were the first institution to start that kind of collaboration before these institutions started their own doctorates.
Who were our best partners in that?
Our best partners would be probably, we had good association with the people at Houston, University of Houston College of Ed there.
Bob Houselm was the dean there.
Bob and I wrote a book together with George Dittemann called Educating a Profession, so we had known each other for years.
We'd worked together back at Rochester.
UT with Kenema, before the new guy came, we had real good relationships with UT.
The new guy tended not to be very committed to education.
He was more interested in dealing with the politicians.
Texas Tech was a good collaboration.
Baylor.
We had
good, good, uh, associations with Trinity.
So we, we, uh.
Right, and then in the school districts, in your experience, who were the best, uh,
partners to work with?
Well, we had people at Spring Branch.
We had people in Waco.
We had 12 superintendents that first started this research.
What did we call it?
It was a collaboration.
We, you know, I don't know exactly the, well, they were all over the state, though.
They weren't just around here.
We had the institutions, Dallas School District worked with us.
Of course, our two local institutions we've always had good collaboration with.
or some school districts that, uh-uh, we don't want to?
Only if that district itself was in trouble, and they were spending so much time on their own problems that, you know, they weren't interested in getting.
But we never really had a whole lot of problem getting institutions to participate.
In fact, our problem oftentimes is they all wanted to.
And we couldn't respond to all of them.
And this still remains a problem, you know.
We're doing a lot of off-campus now work with cohorts where we get the district helps in some cases to provide the funding for the training of the faculty.
And you can only handle so many cohorts, you know.
So the problem hasn't been, even though we're out here in the kind of boondocks, we've always had, and we haven't had any problems getting school districts to work with us.
And you served how many years?
Nine years.
From 89?
Yeah.
And I was a dean for 23 years.
How did the changes in the president's office affect you as a dean?
Each time, you had to spend time educating the new person on what the college was, what we were doing, and over the 23 years I served as dean, I had some real great ones, and then I had some average ones to work.
I worked with 12 presidents and nine provosts in 23 years.
So you worked with Samson, Vandiver, and Mobley.
Yes.
Is that right?
Yep.
And Mobley would have been president when you retired?
Right.
And then when I retired, I worked with him on some projects that he was interested in for about five or four years.
Can you generalize about
those three here?
I would prefer not to.
Let me say this about Mobley.
I thought Mobley had the potential to be the best president of a land-grant university in the United States.
I served on the search committee when he was named dean of business after Muse became, I guess, chancellor.
And he was appointed by acclamation.
We didn't need a search.
Everybody in the college.
Then he became president, and he ran into that situation with Cheryl on the football thing.
We've lost two good, well, see, I had Vandiver, too.
I work with Vandiver, too.
We lost two great presidents over what should be a minor
activity in an institution.
Not through any fault of their own.
As you know, you can get in trouble, not by what you do,
But by what people who you delegate responsibility to, which you don't learn about until after it's too late.
But Mobley had this international focus.
He chaired the Higher Ed Coordinating Boards program in that area.
He was developing this Asian connection and all of this.
And he was a scholar.
I mean, he was accepted as a scholar.
And he had this terrific personality.
And he ran into that.
And I've often thought of this in my classes, this policy issues class, that in terms of the way you'd like to go down in flames,
You might like to go down fighting over the core curriculum or something like that, but to have a situation where you've got this kind of activity happening,
And then I think what happened was he never really had a chance to develop the full potential with the deans.
He got tied up in the business of the capital campaign and all of that.
And I thought he, in terms of the academic programs,
And as you, I think you would believe this, institutions need programs of preeminence, right?
And this institution had been relying a lot on engineering and ag, but I think it's much more than that now.
And it has to be.
And it has the potential to be, I mean, a world leader, really, of a lot of these things.
And each of these people were so different.
I enjoyed working with all of them.
Vandiver, I loved Vandiver, too.
He was different.
He was totally different than anything this place had ever had.
He'd write his books in the morning, and then he would meet with us at lunch, and we'd have some of the best discussions as deans over at his house.
But they were on wonderful issues like world hunger.
Let's talk about world hunger.
What can we do?
Let's have a world meeting here.
Bring all the scholars in the world.
But each of them had their own personality, and each provost.
I felt that when we had McCandless and Phillips and Eaton as a team in that office,
It was the best, best combination of, because as you know from working in that area, you need a team there.
And here you had McCandless who had all the connections with the state and could handle all of the,
the nuts and bolts stuff easily, you know, and he made it look easy.
Probably wasn't.
And then you had Phillips with his wonderful connections with the faculty and tremendous commitment to things like diversity.
And then Eaton, who was a real scholar in his own right, you know.
And with working with him, I can remember going into a meeting with Eaton
And I always went loaded for bear with all the data I had, you know, and budget justifications and needs analysis and all this.
And I had to send it over to him, and I was in a discussion with him about, you know, we'd have it at the beginning of each year around budget time.
And he asked me this question.
He said, where do you derive these objectives?
You know, where did they come from?
Are they yours or your faculty, the people in the state, you know?
And I thought it was just a wonderful question.
Just a wonderful question.
Because I had prepared.
If you prepare, you want somebody to ask you.
One of the other provosts, whose name I won't mention, who followed, I went in and had this similar kind of discussion.
After about the first 30 minutes, I looked, and I looked at these glazed eyes, and the question was, say, I have to come to your faculty Monday morning.
Can you tell me two or three things I ought to say to them?
He had, you know, and Hale was missing this wonderful opportunity to know about one of his colleges so that when he went to the next meeting with the board or something, he could be able to say, these are the things that are going on.
And it wasn't anyone a great guy.
They're all great guys, but it's competence, you know, and it varies from level to level.
But here, I ran into some of the best leadership you can expect.
Probably here and at Vermont, I had the best provost situation with this guy, Al Rawls.
And I had one of the best presidents I ever had.
Real interesting guy, former dean of medicine, who never read anything, he said.
We used to have evaluations with each other.
And at the last evaluation, he said, you know, Dean, I want to tell you this.
He said, you know all the stuff you've been sending me before our meetings?
I never read any of it.
I give it to Al Rollins.
Al Rollins, he loves to read this stuff.
He reads it at night at his kitchen table, he said.
But I'll tell you this, he said, you know, I can't think of anything you ever asked me for that we didn't do if we could.
And he said, you know why?
He said, you come in here all excited about what you want to do.
And who am I?
I don't know anything about what you do.
He said, but since you're excited about it, I figured, well, we'll go along with it, right?
And what he used to do was listen to everybody.
He was a listener rather than a reader.
And what he wanted you to do was disagree with him if you believed differently.
And then he'd hear everybody out.
and then make up his own mind, and then you could not change his mind no matter what you did.
But you knew where he was coming from, and you knew what he was gonna do, and you could count on him to do it.
He was a wonderful guy.
Who were your key dean associates in those nine years?
Fackler in science, Fallon in liberal arts, both very interested in education.
Fallon ended up chairing the national committee
as a representative of the liberal arts on teacher ed.
Fackler had known people in the Office of Education, helped sponsor a conference the first year.
The second year, he came here with people from the National Science Foundation.
He was on the panels.
He helped us get the Mass Science Scholar program going.
They were the natural ones because that's where a lot of our students took their major.
And Kunkel over in agriculture, outstanding guy.
We had the best relationship with agriculture.
And he's into an area of ethics and professionalism, not just in agriculture, but the whole area of professions.
Stone in medicine, outstanding guy, just a real intellectual debater.
And we used to have really good discussions at the dean's meetings, a lot of developmental discussion.
It wasn't just nuts and bolts.
Did you ever have any problem with outside interference from regents, politicians, former students?
Legislators.
Some examples?
Yeah.
We had, what was that guy's name that was the board secretary for all those years?
Bob Sherry?
Bob Sherry.
Bob Sherry called us one time.
We wanted to develop a program up in the base up there near Killeen.
Fort Hood.
The general called us and wondered if we could offer some courses up there for some of the people.
The chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, what was his name?
was good friends with the community, with the Central University up there.
Central, I forgot the name.
Central Texas College.
Central Texas College didn't want us anywhere near Fort Hood.
And Schleter learned that we were thinking about this and called Bob Sherry and said, you know, I think it'd be a good idea if you didn't go up there.
And Sherry said, well, the general, who we're good friends with, being in the former military,
I don't care about that."
He said, and I want to remind, he reminded Bob Sherry about the time during the Ways and Means hearings, there was a president who was giving a report, and he recommended that the salary line in this president's budget for the president be cut.
And so here we were between Schleter, the general, and we finally worked it out that
that we would make arrangements for some of those people to take courses here.
We didn't go up to Fort Hood.
It ended up, though, that the president had to call the general and talk to him about this.
But that's Texas politics.
What about A&M board members?
Never directly had a problem with that.
Probably one of the most interesting problems we had was with Cheryl.
Some of the board members wanted to give Cheryl a tenured faculty appointment, right?
And Vandiver was caught in the middle there.
Vandiver called Ponda.
He didn't call me about this.
And Ponda did what I thought was the right thing.
He called me.
He didn't want to try to answer this alone, which I thought was a good idea.
And we both told the end of it that there was no way in hell we were gonna give Cheryl a tenured faculty appointment, and we would be saving him a lot of problems.
In education?
Yeah, in physical education department, yeah.
And, you know, we had this unwritten rule here.
We never hired anybody from athletics that we wanted to keep the two things separate because we didn't want to end up with all the old coaches ending up in phys ed.
And phys ed was kinesiology.
It wasn't athletics anyway.
We didn't do a lot of preparing of coaches in health and physical education.
We were doing research on
performance and all of that stuff.
And the image of our health and phys ed wasn't, we didn't want it to be sports and athletics and coaching.
And we pointed out to him that the way the policy
of how people get to be promoted and tenured is through the faculty process of peer review, and it would totally destroy any credibility we had with other faculty if we bypassed that process.
And they backed off.
Was Carl Landis still the department?
No, Ponda was.
Ponda was there.
But Ponda handled this.
See, I had tremendous department, tremendous leadership in the college.
We really operated as a very close team.
And we had, I did something, the 10th year of my deaning, I discovered a process that turned out to be the best thing I ever did as a dean.
I would have a folder, and every department head would have a folder, and if we came up with something we wanted to talk to each other about, we'd put it in the folder.
And I would schedule in at the beginning of the year a meeting with every department head every two weeks.
Then with the
development council meetings, we would meet as a team, but there would always be an opportunity individually to meet, and we had built it into our calendars before we did anything else.
Sometime we didn't have anything in the folder, but we used to meet anyway, and that's when we got some of the best stuff done.
So believing as a dean that you do your leadership through other people, not directly this process.
And the department heads, I think, really appreciated that.
Let's see, did any former student attempt to pull any strings?
No former students.
No one saying you got to take this student or that student into the programs.
We had people would call every now and then, but we always stuck pretty much to the policy.
Let's see, was the doctoral program already approved when you got here?
Yes.
So you didn't have to get any new programs?
Well, we went through some new program specialties, and then we went through two NKs while I was dean.
Any problems there?
No problems.
In fact, we won accolades for the most important of the standards in NCAT is the evaluation standard.
And through Jim McNamara's approach, what he did, we used our classes to do survey research.
He put the students on this process where we followed up a significant number of our graduates.
And in the standard, you're not only supposed to follow up
to find out your students' responses after they've been out in the field.
But what we asked them was not only what they thought about the courses they took while they were here, but on the basis of the experience that they're having now, what should we be doing for new people?
And then the other part of the evaluation is, what have you done to change your programs on the basis of the feedback you got?
And we were able to demonstrate all levels of this.
In that almost decade of deaning here, what were your major accomplishments?
What are you most proud?
Well, I'm proud of the
the way the faculty worked together.
I made a pitch to them when I first started.
I'll give you copies of these.
The first presentation I made to the faculty at our regional retreat and a couple others down the road, the anniversary things.
But I always said to them, I thought if I'd like to be remembered in the time I was the dean that the college was
innovative, rigorous, and caring.
And I thought we accomplished all three.
We raised issues of quality.
In terms of the approach we used was to have periodic reviews and then to include everybody
in our presentations, not just the dean's office staff.
So when Vandiver would come over to meet with us,
The people that would present would be the faculty and students in the programs.
And so one of the things I'm most proud of is that we looked at the job of leadership as creating the conditions where you could fit the organization to the individuals.
That what we tried to do was to do what we could do well.
I think as I look at what we were able to do, we expanded the teacher ed program significantly.
We ended up, see, with 2,000 undergraduates and about 1,000 graduate students.
We developed the graduate programs as well.
In order to develop the graduate programs, we needed to seek outside funding.
And in those days, colleges of education weren't really receiving a whole lot of outside grants.
But the way we went about doing that was through these inquiry areas that we had to identify areas that we had the talent and interest to move ahead on once we got the grant.
And I think we began a pattern
that today is really paying off.
It started way back in those days where we started to look at inquiry as something that was part of the life of every faculty member and student.
And today, the college has over $10 million in outside money.
And it all started there.
We created in the Associate Dean for Graduate Education's office an emphasis on research and funding and changed the patterns that had been established.
When I first came, there wasn't much incentive to get grants because you actually carried out the same load that you had
and the money was used for graduate students, and you didn't even keep the equipment.
Today we give PIs some of the return, which gives them incentives to seek funding.
But in those days, there hadn't been enough experience with this, and so we moved into changing the way
We looked at outside funding.
You didn't carry on.
You know, if you got outside money, you were able to have some release time to work on that project, not carry the full load.
And then we began to attract outstanding students in our graduate programs.
And we had more options.
I mean, we had more areas offering programs.
I'm really proud of the minority, the success we had, and the way our faculty were committed to the values of the importance of doing this as an education issue, not an affirmative action issue.
Do you remember any problems with faculty or student, minority faculty or students being accepted in the college?
From the students.
A lot of the students, as you know, in those days who came here had never had a black teacher.
And so this black female African-American who teaches science ed is confronted with a white undergraduate who's her first black teacher she's ever had.
in a university.
She's coming to the university.
And it was tough for some of our black faculty at the beginning because of the lack of experience of our white students with minority teachers.
It never became a real crisis in terms of saying we